>> Richard Feldman: Which brings
us to actual HTTP responses.
So now that we learned all the fundations
of what we need to build an HTTP response,
let's actually build one.
So let's say that I wanna hit
https://frontendmasters.com.
What's going to come back from that
server, the server is going to send back
a response that begins with
a string HTTP/1.1 200 OK.
I'm assuming that we're
using the HTTP/1.1 protocol,
which is extremely widely supported.
HTTP/2 is much fancier.
We are not gonna support HTTP/2 in
our static web server, number one,
because we don't need to.
And number two,
because it's way more complicated and
would take way longer to explain.
So we're just gonna stick
with classic HTTP/1.1.
The next thing it's gonna do is
it's gonna have a blank line.
And then it's gonna say doctype html,
blah, blah, blah,
basically the entire context
of the index side html there.
This is literally what
comes back from the server.
It's this string, new line, this string.
It's all one gigantic string, that's it.
It's not JSON or anything like that,
it's just this format.
If we were to represent
this header right here,
HTTP/1.1 200 OK in bytes in memory,
again, it would be like, okay, well,
H is 72 in ASCII, which means it's also
in UTF-8, which is what web servers use.
T is 84, P is 80, blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah.
These correspond to 1s and 0s.
And then there's gonna be
an extra 0 at the end here.
Now, when I say the extra 0 at the end,
what I mean is that it's the byte 0.
It's not one of these 0s,
cuz these 0s are actually 48,
0 in ASCII/UTF-8 is the number 48.
But what I mean is the actual byte is 0.
This is what's called a null terminator.
And basically, what it means,
is that it's what C strings use
to mark the end of a string.
So I can just give that memory
address to whatever function I want.
And if that function wants to know,
conceptually, where does that string end,
it can just keep reading, reading,
reading, reading, reading.
And then as soon as it hits the 0,
it knows, I found the end of the string,
that's where it's supposed to be.
And it's a way that you can have your
functions work just in terms of the memory
address here, without needing to also
separately pass around the length of
the string, like write took the explicit
length as a separate argument.
But it's a way that the function can
sort of figure that out for itself.
If we wanted to name this and
give it to a variable,
this is the type that we would get.
[LAUGH] It's short for character.
Some people call it car,
because it's C-H-A-R,
looks like it might be pronounced car.
Some people will call it char.
Character is like, maybe you could call
it care, but I don't hear that as much.
I usually hear either char or car.
I guess I've heard care before, but
I personally always say char star,
because it rhymes.
But whatever,
you can pronounce this however you want.
But char basically means byte.
For historical reasons, 1972, they called
it char for character, even though in
Unicode terms it doesn't actually
necessarily correspond to a character.
And then the star there basically
means the memory address.
So this thing right here, again,
it's 1972 design decisions,
they decided to make the star be next to
the word rather than next to the thing.
This is actually the type of header,
is like the char and
the star both are part
of the type of header.
And what this is saying is basically,
this is the address of a byte, or
you might hear people say
the pointer to a byte.
So char means byte, basically, and
the star means it's not that header
itself is a single byte, but
rather that header is the memory address
of the this initial byte right here.
And yeah, basically, so in memory, if you
were to look at the 1s and 0s in memory,
this right here would
actually be an integer.
It would be the actual memory address
of the beginning of this string,
because that's what like char star means.
It means the address of a particular byte,
namely the first byte of this string.
So in memory,
that's what we would see right here.
So when I call write, passing one and this
header, if I wanted to do it this way,
like previously, we had the Hello World,
we had the actual string here.
But if I wanted to just pass
in this variable instead,
what would actually be happening at
runtime is that this integer is gonna be
passed in here cuz write
takes three integers.
If I didn't wanna hard code the 15 here,
which is a totally reasonable thing,
I can call the strlen function.
That will basically go, it takes the
header, which is, again, an integer, and
it walks through the array just boop,
boop, boop, boop, boop,
until it finds one of these 0 bytes and
it's like, that's the end.
However many we pass along the way,
that's the length of the string.
Now, obviously, that's pretty inefficient,
walking through the entire every single
byte in the string just to count
up the total number of bytes.
But basically,
that is essentially what strlen is doing.
Fortunately, optimizations will mean that
if you're calling strlen on a hard coded
thing like this, where this,
at compile time,
is gonna get translated to this number.
And then the optimizer can say,
well, wait a minute,
I know that this is just working
on a hardcoded memory address.
I'm just gonna optimize that away for you.
You're not actually gonna
pay a runtime cost for this.
But if you're doing this based on
something dynamic that's coming in
from the user and not hardcoded,
then you actually are paying for walking
through the entire string at runtime.
Another way you can see this happen is,
instead of saying char star,
you can say this basically
is the symbol for an array.
This is another thing you can do,
is basically define it to be this way.
And this allows you to actually literally
put the address there if you want.
Not saying you should do it that way.
Probably the way that you should
do it is with the char * style.
We're gonna talk a little
bit more about arrays later.
But basically, just sort of be aware,
if you do see this square bracket syntax,
it essentially means this is
an array of unknown length,
which works out at runtime to
be exactly the same thing.
It's an integer representing the memory
address of the beginning of that array.
So both of these two
are essentially equivalent.
Okay, and yeah,
the memory addresses of these, once again,
will just sort of increase monotonically,
like that.
Okay, so, yeah, yeah.
So the 0 at the end here, the 0 byte,
this is what's referred to
as a NULL-terminated string.
So NULL meaning 0 in this case, not to be
confused with null in JavaScript sense,
which is its own semantic thing.
Here NULL just means 0 byte,
as opposed to 0 character.
So NULL-terminated just means this is
a string that has a 0 byte at the very
end of it.
And yeah, you might be saying,
isn't strlen incredibly slow for
something like C?
Well, yes, so
why don't you destroy the length up front?
Then you wouldn't have to deal
with this fancy like, well,
performance optimization only works
if it's known at compile time.
At runtime, if we got this value and
the string came in from a user,
then we'd have to march
over the whole thing.
Yeah, it would be more efficient in terms
of getting the length of a string to store
the length up front.
But again, you've got to remember,
1972 design decisions, right?
When you're this limited on memory, it
can potentially make sense to say, well,
instead of storing a 32 or 64 bit length
with every single string that you're
passing around,
maybe we wanna just store one byte.
And yeah, it's gonna take longer to
traverse the string to ask about its
length is.
But at least you are reducing your overall
memory usage compared to passing around
the length every single time, or
storing it alongside the string.
So it's sort of like
pre-computing the length.
Having said that, I also have heard people
say that even in 1972 this was the wrong
trade off to make, but I wasn't there, I
wasn't even born yet, so who am I to say?
But that's kind of the reasoning for this.
When you encounter C APIs in the wild,
even the node, JSC API,
it's still doing stuff like expecting
NULL-terminated strings and stuff.
So even though this design decision hasn't
really aged very well in terms of what's
performant in a good trade off in
terms of CPU cycles and memory.
It's still like a whole lot of C APIs
will use NULL-terminated strings and say,
you gotta give me a NULL-terminated
string right here.
Okay, yes, but at least in this case,
where we're using static hard coded thing,
at least it will get optimized away.
So that will just become a 15.
Okay, so to sort of like flesh out the
rest of this example, the import unistd.h
for the right, we also need to include
string.h if we wanna call strlen,
because that's not available
unless you import that library.
And finally, we can basically say, okay,
here's our int main, and then return 0.
And now, instead of Hello World,
we basically have HTTP/1.1 200 OK.
If we wanna do a little bit fancier and
use the printf formatting here, we can do
%s, which we talked about a little bit
in the previous section, instead of %d.
Worth noting though that, again,
remember, this is a number, right?
At runtime, this right here is the memory
address of the beginning of this string.
Which means that %s is just going to be
like, okay, I assume that this number that
you're giving me is the memory address
of the beginning of that string.
How does it know where
the end of the string is?
Again, it expects it
to be NULL-terminated.
So what printf is gonna do is it's
gonna say, okay, %s means literally,
take this memory address, start traversing
it, and start sending the bytes one
at a time to standard out until I get
to a 0 byte, at which point I'm done.
And that's the end of that string,
and that's what %s does in printf.
As we saw earlier, write doesn't do that.
So this is one of the conveniences
that printf does for you,
being a wrapper around write,
is it the %s will do that NULL-terminated
aware byte traversal for you.
And then, yeah, if you wanna print it as a
32-bit integer, you can do that, as we saw
the exercises, but that's just gonna show
you what is the actual memory address, or
at least the first 32-bits of it.
If you wanna print the entire memory
address, I don't know why, I'm sure
there's some reason that it's zud instead
of d to print it as a 64-bit integer.
But this being a 64-bit laptop, and
pretty much every machine that everyone
in this course is gonna use is gonna
be on a 64-bit machine,
this is gonna be a 64-bit integer.
So if you wanna literally see
what is the actual runtime,
the actual memory address that's being
sent to printf, you can do that.
And if you do it like this,
it's gonna be like, cool, here it is,
here is that integer.
Again, memory is basically
a gigantic array of bytes.
And if you want,
C will let you see what is the actual
index into that memory at runtime.
Cool, all right, so,
summary of all the things we talked about.
We talked about numbers in memory,
like the the actual 0s and 1s and
how we can interpret them ourselves.
The critical takeaway there was that we
get to decide how memory is interpreted.
As we saw in that very last example there,
you can decide that the giant array
of bytes in memory is 1s and 0s.
You can decide that it's integers that
are 8-bits, 16-bits, 32-bits, 64-bits.
Or you can decide that there's strings
that could be encoded as ASCII, UTF-8.
It's all up to us as the programmer
to decide what those 1s and 0s mean.
And if we make mistakes and one programmer
thinks they mean this thing and
the other one thinks they mean this thing,
at least in the C world,
we're gonna get some unhappy results.
But it's not gonna give us a nice
error message, that's for sure,
it's just gonna interpret
them incorrectly.
We talked about byte arrays, so
we can have just back-to-back bytes, and
then we can index into those,
just like the global array of memory.
Talked about null-terminated strings,
where the 0 byte at the end of the string,
not to be confused with 0 the character,
which is not a 0 byte.
But 0 terminated strings
are essentially a way to be able to
just pass this memory
address to something and
have it actually without any other
information, nowhere the string ends.
And then finally how getting a string's
length is a little bit inefficient.
Maybe a design decision that
hasn't aged well since 1972, but
if it's a hard coded string,
it will get inlined.
And if worse comes to worse,
you can also just explicitly pass
around the length separately.
Then some functions, such as write
will say, I'm not gonna traverse and
go look for the null-terminated.
You just give me the length and
I'll just assume that's how many you want.